Hey David. Hey Michael. Hey. How are you? I'm awesome. Thanks for being here on the YouTube channel and of course on Talk Python.me. It's going to be fun to talk about biology, genetics, and Python. Yeah, I'm excited to talk about it. Cool. All right, let's kick this off. David, welcome to Talk Python.me.
- Thanks, Michael.
It's great to be here.
- Yeah, it's great to have you here.
You know, one of the things I really love to explore
is the somewhat non-traditional use cases of Python
that are not straight down the, I'm building an API
and something that talks to a database for a startup,
right, something like that,
but blending it with other technologies
and science and whatnot,
and genetics plus Python, it's gonna be interesting.
- It sure is.
- Yeah, so when you got into this,
did you start out on the biology side
or the programming side of the world?
- I definitely started out on the biology side.
Yeah, so I went all the way through grad school
with relatively minimal formal programming experience.
- Yeah, okay, so you studied biology and genetics
and whatnot, and then how'd you end up here
on a Python podcast?
- Yeah, so I always thought that programming would be cool,
but I didn't really have much of an opportunity
through my undergraduate studies
to really do much formal programming.
I took one computer science class
that my college had to offer.
It was in C++.
I think I wrote a Bogle program or something
with some recursion in there.
It was pretty fun.
I didn't really get to use Python until graduate school.
I was in a genetics course and we were basically tasked
with doing some data analysis on published data
and then reproducing some plots in a figure
and then extending it further.
My partner and I decided to learn Python,
teach it to ourselves so that we could do this.
We heard that it was a good way
to do data analysis in biology.
And so we basically taught it to ourselves
and we used NumPy and some basic string searching
and things to redo this analysis.
And it was really amazing what we could do
with Python for that.
So we brought back--
- That's awesome.
How'd the learning project go?
Like coming from not having a ton of programming,
what was your experience like?
- It was relatively easy, I would say.
I think my brain sort of fits pretty well
with how programming languages work,
but it was definitely a lot in a short amount of time
to really dive into how to make sure
your while loops don't stay open
and then someone tells you
maybe you shouldn't use a while loop at all.
I was learning a lot of things not to do right away.
- Yeah, of course, but you had to get
all the analysis done, right?
So you gotta solve all the problems and power through.
- Yeah, yeah, so we did.
We got our analysis done there
and we reproduced some plots and got some new analysis made.
And I think we really just,
I really came to appreciation of how much you can do
in a short amount of time
with just a little bit of coding knowledge
or essentially none.
- Yeah, I think that's really an important takeaway
that a lot of people,
you know, maybe many people listen to the podcast
already kind of know,
but I think looking in from the outside,
it feels like, oh, I've got to, you know,
go get a degree in this to be productive
useful and really what you need is like a couple of weeks and a small problem and you're already
there. Absolutely, yeah. I've definitely found that just learning through doing has been the way
I've worked entirely. I have essentially no formal programming training, no coursework, and
I'm using Python every day. That's fantastic. Yeah, I didn't take that much computer science
that are just enough to do the extra stuff
from my math degree.
Very cool.
All right, now how about today?
You're working at Beam Therapeutics doing genetic stuff.
Tell us about what you do day to day.
- Yeah, so I'm on the computational sciences team
at Beam Therapeutics.
We're a gene editing company.
So we develop these precision genetic medicines
that are, we're trying to develop them
to cure genetic diseases that are caused
by single genetic changes in the genome.
So one example of it--
- You got a shift mutation or something like that?
- Yep, yep.
And so if you have one of these genetic changes,
you might have a disease that is lifelong
and there aren't any cures for most of these diseases.
So we're trying to create these,
we call them hopefully lifelong cures for patients,
by changing the genetic code back to what it should be.
- That's incredible.
It seems really out of the future.
I mean, I think it's one thing to understand genetics
at play and it's even amazing to be able to read
the gene sequences, but it's entirely another thing
I think to say, and let's rewrite that.
- Yeah, we're definitely at the cutting edge
of a lot of biotechnology and science
that has really come to a head in the last decade
with CRISPR and technologies that use CRISPR,
which ours do, to be able to precisely target
genetic sequences, it's a really fascinating place to work
and it's a privilege.
- I bet, you know, a lot of people go to work
and they end up writing what you might classify
as forms over data.
It's like, well, I need a view into this bit of our database
or I need to be able to run a query
to just see who's got the most sales this week
or something like that.
And that's important work and it's useful
and there's cool design patterns
and whatnot you can focus on.
But it's also, it's not like what people dream
of necessarily building when they wake up.
But this kind of science, like maybe so, right?
Like these are the really interesting problems
that both have a positive outcome, right?
You're helping cure disease, not just, you know,
shave another one 100th of a percent off of a transaction
that you get a key for, you know, something like that,
right, from like in finance.
- Yeah, I think we--
- Yeah, you can use really cool tech to do it too,
like programming wise.
- Yeah, I mean, one of our dreams that we joke about
on the computational team is that, like,
it's conceivable one day we could say,
like, hey, Alexa, how do we cure sickle cell disease?
And it'll tell you what parts of our technology
we should put together to cure that disease.
And that's sort of like the pipe dream
of where we could go if we combine all our data
in the right ways.
And I think all of the stuff we'll talk about today
is really just laying out the framework for that.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So you mentioned CRISPR.
maybe tell people a bit about that biotechnology.
- Yeah, so CRISPR is a molecular machine
which targets a very specific place
in a specific genetic sequence.
And so usually people are using CRISPR
to target a specific place in the genome,
a specific sequence.
And what CRISPR does naturally is to cut at that point
that sequence. So it'll cut in a very specific place in the genome.
And as people who are using CRISPR,
we can actually decide where it's going to cut by giving it a different
targeting sequence. so this,
this sort of like directed molecular machine is a basis of a whole new
field of biotechnology using CRISPR and CRISPR derived technology.
So our technology is like kind of a CRISPR 2.0
where we don't use CRISPR to cut,
we use the localization machinery
and we add onto it another protein
which just changes a base
instead of cutting the DNA itself.
So it's slight variation,
but it's still using this same CRISPR technology.
- Okay.
So let me see if my not very knowledge filled background
understand here is kind of a, has a decent analogy.
So is it, does it work basically like you give it like almost like find and
replace, like you give it a sequence of, of, pairs and it says, okay, if I
find a TTC, a T like enough specificity and that it's like, that's the unique
one, and then it does like cut at that point.
Is that kind of how it works?
Yep.
It's pretty much just like that.
You give it the sequence you want to target,
and then if it finds that sequence in the genome,
it will cut the genetic material, the DNA,
at that position for normal CRISPR.
>>Yeah.
So when you're coming up with these cures--
and we'll get to the Python in just a second,
but I want to set the foundation of the science, right?
So when you're coming up with these,
and you say, we're going to rewrite the DNA to solve
this problem, how do you do it on a large enough scale?
Like how do you, I mean, how much of the body
has to be changed for this to be permanent, right?
- Right, it's definitely a tricky question.
I think we definitely leverage human biology,
how the human body works for a lot of these problems.
For example, some of our leading drug candidates
are for sickle cell disease.
And because of the way sickle cell disease manifests
in red blood cells, and red blood cells are created
through a set of, through, there's a specific type of cell
that creates red blood cells.
And we can, if you access that type of cell
and you cure a sickle cell in these progenitor cells,
the stem cells, then you can create all red blood cells
from a cured population.
So if you can target it to the progenitor cells,
you can cure sickle cell throughout the body essentially,
because the symptoms are from the red blood cells.
There's a lot of diseases that which,
by curing a single organ,
you can cure the symptoms of the disease.
- All right, like diabetes or sickle cell anemia
or something like that?
- Yeah, like sickle cell diseases in the liver,
like some blindnesses in the eye,
by just targeting specifically where the symptoms occur,
you can cure the disease.
- Yeah, that's amazing.
Is it a shot?
Is it a blood transfusion?
Or like, how do you deliver this stuff?
- Yeah, delivery is a huge place of research.
And it definitely depends on the type of targeting
we're doing.
So for something in the eye,
it would probably be an injection.
for something in the blood, it's slightly more complicated
and it's not an injection.
For something in the liver,
it would probably be more akin to a injection
or dosing regimen.
- Yeah.
Okay, it sounds really fascinating.
Like I said, it feels like it's a little bit
out of the future to be able to come up with these
and just say, no, we're just gonna rewrite
this little bit of the genetics.
- And I think it'll be good.
But if you can make it happen,
it's pretty clear how it's obviously a benefit, right?
Like those progenitor cells,
they eventually have to recreate new ones.
And then the way they do that is they clone
their current copy of the DNA, which is the fixed one, right?
So if you can get enough of them going,
it'll just sort of propagate from there.
- Yep.
And we're also the benefit that sometimes
you only need to cure a small fraction
to remove the symptoms.
And so lots of things going for us there.
- Wow, that's awesome.
So Derek, I'm sure there's a lot of people involved
in this type of work.
What exactly are you and your team working on?
- Yeah, so our team,
we call ourselves the computational sciences team.
We really sit in the middle of the research
and development arm of the organization,
processing all of our sequencing data
and some other data as well.
And as you can imagine, with our technology changing DNA,
changing genomes, there's a lot of sequencing data
because what we're trying to do
is change a genetic sequence.
So we have to read out that genetic sequence
and then figure out, has it changed?
How many copies are changed and things like that.
So the techniques of next generation sequencing,
NGS are pretty broad, and we deal with a lot of different types of these next-generation
sequencing assays that are being done at Beam.
So our team really processes, analyzes, and collaborates with the experimental scientists
on performing and developing these experiments.
Cool.
So the scientists will do some work and they'll attempt to use CRISPR-like technology to make
changes and then they measure the changes they've made and it's you all sort of take that data and
compare it and work with it. Right yeah and the act of measuring it's the act of measuring the
changes itself is relatively computationally intensive so we run and support pipelines for
all of these standard assays as well which is just as part of our our job. How much data is in
DNA. I mean, I know that human biology stores or just biology stores an insane amount of data,
but also computers store an insane amount of data and processing. So I'm not sure like which
where the sort of trade off is, but what what sort of data are we talking about? How much?
Yeah, I mean, it definitely depends on the type of assay that we're doing, like the scale of the
the data, I would say, usually, we're not looking--
sometimes we're looking at things that are looking at all
the bases in the genome.
More often, we're looking at defined regions of the genome
where we're trying to make the change.
>> This one gene is the problem, right?
And let's look at that.
>> Right, yeah.
We're trying to target here, so that's where we're looking.
It definitely depends on the assay.
But I guess in terms of data scale, in terms of file sizes,
perhaps that would be accessible.
For standard things, it would be on the order
of a few gigabytes per experimental run.
For some of our larger assays,
it's 10 to 100 times that per experiment.
- That's a lot of data, but not impossible
to transmit sort of amounts of data, right?
Or store. - Right.
- Yeah, I think every little piece of it
is pretty manageable.
When you start combining them together
and looking at some down,
like your downstream results and things,
the data does get pretty large,
but I wouldn't say we're at the scale
of like big data analytics at Google or anything like that.
- Yeah, yeah, or the LHC,
if you've ever looked at the data flow layers at LHC,
it's like the stuff near the collectors
is just unimaginable amounts of data, right?
Yeah, I haven't looked, but I'm sure it's certainly.
- Yeah, they've got a lot of stuff built in,
like on board the detectors to filter down a bunch,
and then it goes for processing,
then it gets filtered down some more,
and then like eventually it gets to a point
where like now we have enough space on hard drives
to save it, but before that it was like,
it couldn't be saved on hard drives, it was just too much.
Yeah, very interesting.
But it sounds to me like some of the real big challenges
for you all is the computational bits, right?
Because if you take all these things
then you can end up in combinatorial comparison scenarios,
I'm sure, that can really blow up the computing time.
Yeah, I think definitely there's a lot of the challenges
sometimes in these combinatorics,
and there's also just a lot of steps that have to go on
to process a lot of this data.
There's a lot of biology-specific pieces of software
that we use for various things,
and we have to string them together
to create a complete data processing pipeline.
And a lot of that is part of our job,
how to get all these tools to behave together
and act in unison to actually process the data effectively.
- I can just imagine some of these pipelines are tricky.
It's like, well, okay, so it starts over here
where the robot gets it and it reads this data
and we can access that off the hard drive.
and then it has to be sent to this Windows app
that actually doesn't have an API.
So we got to somehow like automate that thing
and then get data out of it.
And then is that what it's like?
That's some of it.
Tell us about your life.
Okay.
Yeah, there's a couple aspects that I think we might touch on.
But for sequencing experiments,
the pipelines are more defined
because we usually get the data
from a source that's already in the cloud,
which I'm always happy about.
If we can start in the cloud, we'll stay in the cloud.
And that's a nice place to be.
For data that's coming directly from instruments on premises,
there is another layer of art that
has to do with software on the instrument, software that
gets the data to the cloud and moves it
around between our other database sources.
And that is some fun projects in itself there.
- Yeah, I can imagine.
I've worked in some areas where it's like
collecting data from all these different things
and then you know, to process it and move it along.
And yeah, it's not always just send it
from this Python function to that Python function
to that Python function.
There's a lot of janky stuff that wasn't really meant
to be part of pipelines possibly.
- Absolutely, yeah.
- So with robots, do you have to actually talk
to the robots, like any of the type of automated things?
>>Yeah, for lab automation is what
we call our team that has the robots,
as we like to call them.
As you can imagine, with a lot of these types of experiments,
they can be made much more efficient
if we can have robots doing the actual transfer of liquids
and incubation and centrifugation,
these scientific techniques that sometimes you
need someone in the lab to do, but oftentimes you
can automate them.
And so the lab robotics aspect is an important part
of how we can efficiently generate data.
And a lot of the issues around that
come with how to pass instructions to the instrument
and how to get back data from the instrument when it's done.
And then there's a whole other art
of making the instruments actually
orchestrate together, which is held
in a different world of software.
And I don't actually work on that part myself.
>>That part of programming definitely seems a little bit
magical, getting factories or little automations
of different machines to work together.
That's very cool.
Yeah, there's a whole lot of proprietary software involved
in actually running the instruments.
But in terms of the problems in getting the data to them,
I think it's one of those-- it could be a relatively common
software problem of getting information
from somewhere in the cloud.
We have electronic lab notebooks and laboratory data systems
that are in the cloud.
And users will be submitting information
about how they want their samples processed by the robots.
And then there's the problem of getting that
to the instruments themselves.
And I think it actually sort of reminded me
of the talks you guys had in episode, I think it was 327,
the small automation projects.
- Yeah, yeah.
- We ended up with quite a few of those here
where we have these relatively small tasks
of take data from an API,
put it somewhere where a robot can access it.
Usually we use AWS S3.
And these sort of very small data handling tasks
end up being these nice little projects
for Python to come into play.
- Oh, that's awesome.
I can see that that definitely happens, right?
If a file shows up here,
grab it, upload it to that bucket
and name it whatever the active experiment is
with the data or something like that, right?
That's a very small program to write,
but then that becomes a building block in this flow,
putting these pieces and machines together.
- Right, yeah.
And then once it comes into the cloud,
we do another set of data processing on it.
We upload it to our current databases
and all of that we orchestrate on AWS using,
I guess they call it the serverless design patterns.
So we don't have to handle anything on our own computers.
- Yeah, that's really nice.
And the serverless stuff probably helps you
avoid running just tons of VMs in the cloud, right?
Like it can all be on demand.
Like the Lambda trigger is a file appears in this S3 bucket.
So then it starts down the flow, right?
- Absolutely, yeah.
I really don't like maintaining a lot of infrastructure,
although we do have a good amount of it
that we do have to maintain.
I find that these small Python functions
are the perfect use case for those event-driven
Lambda functions, which are running these
very simple pieces of code.
When an object appears in S3,
they get a small event about when the object was uploaded,
and then they do their thing,
a little bit of data conversion,
send it to an API, and now the data is in our data store.
And those things just happen,
and they're super consistent.
They don't require anything on my end to maintain.
It's a pretty beautiful pattern.
- That's awesome.
They don't need things like,
oh, there's a new kernel for Linux
that patches the vulnerability.
So let's go and patch our functions, right?
Just, it's all magic.
It all happens on its own.
- Right, and it does feel like magic a lot of the time.
Yeah, setting them up can be a little bit of a challenge,
but once they're there, they're very consistent.
- Yeah, yeah, cool.
One of the things you talked about doing,
using was the AWS CDK or Cloud Development Kit.
I think I've heard of this before,
but it's like, I don't,
I've definitely not used this personally.
Tell us where this, what is this?
How's it help you?
- Right, so I, one of the,
when I started dabbling with these Lambda functions,
what I found pretty soon after I had four or five of these functions
which I had uploaded on the AWS console,
and if anyone's used that,
know that it can be pretty tedious once you have a few things running,
getting all your permissions and things set up.
And I was looking for better ways to do this
And it was at that point, it was early days for this AWS cloud development kit, AWS CDK.
And what it is, is a way to write your infrastructure as code in essentially any common language, programming language.
So you can write JavaScript, TypeScript, I think you can do Java, Go and Python, perhaps.
And using it, you can define your cloud infrastructure
in an object-oriented way with all the parameters they need.
And you can deploy it to different AWS accounts,
you can take it down, you can reconfigure it,
you can look at how it's changed since your last commit,
and you can store all that configuration in source control.
And this has allowed us to scale up
in terms of number of Lambda functions,
I think we have maybe 60 or something now,
which would be unmaintainable in the council.
But they're essentially just completely maintained
inside of source control these days
using AWS CDK and Python.
- Yeah, it seems super neat.
I have not used it, but on the page,
which I'll link to in the show notes,
they have Werner Vogels, the CTO of Amazon,
AWS and talks about some of the benefits
and kind of how it all fits together.
And like you said, you can store your cloud structure
definition in source control.
You can run unit tests against your infrastructure to say,
if I apply all these commands to AWS,
so I actually get what I was hoping to get out of it.
And yeah, it seems like a really neat thing
for this infrastructure as code bits.
- Yeah, and I think it, I mean, it definitely really shines
when you're developing larger pieces of infrastructure.
But I would actually encourage people to check it out,
even if they have a small automation type project.
This is what I was thinking of
when I was listening to episode 327 the other day.
When you have these things you'd want to run
on your computer with a cron job,
you can actually run them for free on AWS Lambda.
You get a bunch of free time on the free tier.
and you try it out, you don't need to make sure
your system D process or whatever is running.
And it's a pretty cool way to get familiar
with how to do some of these things on AWS.
I'm not sure if this also exists for other cloud providers.
We use AWS in particular, so that's what I know,
but it may also exist for things like Azure and Google Cloud.
- Sure.
Yeah, maybe, I don't know if it does either,
but it definitely seems useful
for what you all are doing there.
One of the things it could be useful for,
and one of the challenges I suspect
that you run into more than a lot of places,
certainly more than like an e-commerce site
or something like that, is reproducibility, right?
If you're going to say, we're gonna come up with a treatment
that literally gets injected into people,
you've gotta go through FDA,
you've gotta have possibly peer-reviewed stuff.
there's a lot of reproducibility and data stewardship
going on, I imagine, right?
- Absolutely.
That's definitely the case.
We are very cognizant of the fact
that we have to make our software
as reproducible as possible.
I think a lot of that lends itself
to just using good development practices,
containerizing everything that you're doing
for data processing, pinning all your versions,
appropriate source control, all of these things.
And the infrastructure is definitely a piece of that
because if we can't deploy the pipeline in the same way
a year from now, we won't be able to get the same results
from the data, and that's the problem.
- That's a big challenge.
It's tricky, right?
Because things like containers and source control,
that'll absolutely get you very far.
But then you're also depending on these external things
that have been very stable and very likely will be
like Lambda, for example.
But what if Amazon went out of business?
Which is kind of laughable, right?
It's only like doubled its revenue this year or something.
But theoretically, it's possible that AWS decided
to shut down or something like that.
- Yeah, it's definitely true.
- These are trade-off, right?
But at the same time, it's so enabling
for you to just scale out all this workload.
- Yeah, I mean, in terms of how we create data pipelines,
I think a lot of the ways we do it,
we do have to be aware of creating them in a way
that you can run them outside of the cloud.
Sometimes we need to allow a third party
to run our data analysis in a regulated way.
And that requires us to have essentially
running it internally, we run it in the cloud,
which is efficient for scaling,
but we also need to be able to take that same piece
of software and run it in a way that may not be on AWS,
it may not be in the cloud at all.
And that creates some interesting software challenges.
- Yeah, I'm sure because so many of the APIs
are cloud native, right?
you import Bodo, Bodo do this thing
or something like that, right?
How do you deal with that?
- I think a lot of it comes down to
structuring your workflows and your data pipelines
in ways that are, they're not really using the cloud
as much as they're using the cloud as a,
they're using the cloud as both a file system
and a way to gain compute,
but they're not using any piece of the cloud
to actually affect the data processing itself.
So ideally, if you create the data pipeline
in a way that is appropriate,
you can both run it in the cloud and run it locally
and achieve identical results because it's containerized.
Primarily, that's the reason, I guess.
But doing that, I think, is a challenge in itself.
It's really like the process of getting a data pipeline built
is a big ask in our field.
I think a lot of companies spend a lot of time
thinking about this.
Yeah, I'm sure they do.
Getting it right is a huge enabler, right?
So let's talk about the process of maybe coming up
with a new data pipeline.
What does a software project look like for you all?
Yeah, so it usually begins with a collaborative meeting
with some experimental scientists
where we discuss what's the experimental design going
to be like, what are we going to be looking at in the data,
and then the experimentalists will go
and they'll generate some form of sequencing data.
At that point, we generally take the data,
open up some Jupyter notebooks or some small Python, sometimes even just bash scripts,
to try to use some of those standard third-party tools.
These are things like making sure all the sequences are aligned to each other so that
you know when there's differences and making sure the quality is correct and things like
that.
These are pretty standard bioinformatics things.
And for sequencing assays, there's usually a couple spots where there's some real experimental
logic going into it, where often we'll have to write custom code in Python to say, "If
there's this sequence here, it means we should keep the sequence.
And if there's this sequence here, we should divide the sequence in half," or something
like that.
And so that code gets written in Python.
Maybe it's in the Jupyter notebook or another script.
And we sort of do this really slow testing depending on the size of the data.
It might be locally on a laptop or in a small cloud-based HPC type cluster.
So this is where we're doing.
- You're not trying to process all the results.
You just want to spot check and see if it's coming out right before you turn it loose,
right?
- Right.
Or we're very patient.
a little bit about it.
Sometimes it's very difficult to take only a small fraction
of the data, but we try when we can.
And so I guess once we've settled on something
that we think is pretty locked down,
we'll take it out of the Jupyter notebooks.
We don't try to use Paper Mill or anything like that.
We try to get it out of there as soon as possible
into some more complex scripts.
They might be a shell script that
runs a number of other scripts in order,
or we might start using some sort of workflow manager.
The workflow managers in bioinformatics are pretty common
because everyone has the same problem
of running all these third-party tools together
and custom code.
- Right, it's a lot of shared tools as well, probably.
Right, they all use this library or that app.
- Absolutely, yeah.
There's definitely-- - There's LabView
or whatever it is, right?
there's a whole bunch of standard bioinformatics tools
that we run on almost everything.
And so some of the workflow managers are designed
to specifically work very well with those tools
and others are pretty agnostic
of what you're doing with them.
- Yeah.
One of the things I find interesting
and listening to you talk about this,
it just reminded me is so often we see these problems
that people are solving, right?
like over here we're using CRISPR to do all this work.
And then you talk about the tools you use.
It's like, oh yeah, we're using like NumPy and Pandas
and Jupyter and these kinds of things.
And the thing that I find really interesting is
for software development,
there's so much of the stuff that is,
it's just the same for everyone, right?
They're doing the same thing.
And then there's 10 or 20% that like, yeah,
this field does this part different,
but there's like 80% of, yeah, we kind of,
we should use source control, we're using Python,
we're using notebooks, we're using pandas
and that kind of stuff.
And it's the similarities are way more common
than I think they appear from the outside.
- That's, it's a great point.
And I think we'd all be better off
if we reminded ourselves of that more often
that we're not, just because we're doing biotechnology
and things with Python that were largely very similar
to other software developers doing data science
on business topics or finance or just standard web development.
You could be in a hedge fund and you're like,
this isn't that different than what I'm used to, actually.
Yeah.
And if you think like that, you end up with, I think,
better practices overall in the software.
Yeah.
Oh, I totally agree.
Also, I suspect that this fact is what also makes
the data science tools and all the tooling
around Python libraries and whatnot so good
because it's not just like,
oh, the biologists have made this part of it really good.
It's like most of the people are all really refining
like the core parts.
- Right, yeah, I think that's definitely the case.
And some of the biology specific tools
are a little wonky when you start using them.
I think, I mean, things like pandas are really amazing.
- You can tell the amount of attention
or something is different.
Cool.
What is moving to production look like for you?
So you talked about sometimes it's,
you start the exploration and stuff in notebooks,
which is exactly what they're built for.
And then moving to maybe a little more composition
of scripts and whatnot.
And eventually somehow you end up with,
you know, Lambda, cloud databases, things like that.
What's that flow?
- Yeah, so the process of, I guess we say,
productionizing a pipeline is,
we've had pretty well set now.
And generally how it works is we say,
this pipeline is about done.
And we'll hand it off to myself or one of my colleagues
to start the process of getting it fully cloud capable
and scalable.
And what that means for us is to take the software
in whatever form we've gotten it from our colleagues
and put it into a workflow manager.
And I think every company has their own version
of workflow manager that they choose.
We're using Luigi, which is fully Python based.
that was originally developed at Spotify
to do this sort of task.
It's a, it uses like a GNU make type target file,
DAG creation.
I don't know all the technical terms
to describe how the tasks are built,
but you essentially, you have a task at the end
and you say it requires the output of this other task
and then that task requires some more.
And as they build up, you create a graph
of what tasks need to be done to get to our output.
- Right, a directed acyclic graph.
And then the workflow can decide like,
oh, these two things are independent,
so let's scale them out separately.
But now this one has to wait for these two to finish
and then get its results.
And that coordination can be really tricky.
- Exactly.
And so there's a number of common work managers
in bioinformatics, I think the two most common
are SnakeMake and NextFlow.
Luigi has also been really good for us.
We like it primarily because it is fully Python based
and it uses standard Python syntax,
which allows us to really, if we need to,
get under the hood and add some customization,
extend it where we need to,
or fix things that we don't like about it.
And I think that was a really important part of our decision
in choosing Luigi over some of these other workflow managers.
- Yeah, for sure.
I had a nice conversation with the Apache Airflow folks
not too long ago.
And one of the things that really struck me about this
is the ability for people to work
on little parts of the processing.
A little bit like that little Python automation tools
or little Python projects that you described earlier
in episode 327 in that instead of trying to figure out
all this orchestration, you just have to figure out,
well, this little task is gonna do a thing.
And that, like I said, maybe it means see the file
and then copy it over there.
And if your job was see a file here, copy it over there,
like that's a really simple job.
You can totally nail that.
You know what I mean?
- Yeah.
- Whereas if your job is to orchestrate this graph
and make sure that it runs on time
and here's the failure case,
all of a sudden that becomes super, super hard.
So these seem really empowering,
almost like the promise of microservices is like,
you get to focus on one little part and do that.
Yeah, it definitely helps.
And it helps with that idea of having these small tasks.
It really helps with how you can develop it
and reuse the components.
For each task, like we might, as we said earlier,
that there are these third party tools that end up being used in almost all of our pipelines
and using something like Luigi or any workflow manager, you can reuse the tasks in different
contexts as need be.
And you can have your perfectly optimized way of using that task everywhere.
And that reuse is really nice.
And it's something I think a lot of software developers appreciate.
Yeah, for sure.
- So if you look at some of the folks
that are using Luigi, so Spotify,
like I believe you said, as you said, created it,
but also Foursquare, Stripe, Asana, SeatGeek,
you know, a lot of companies that people probably heard of,
like, oh, these places are doing awesome stuff,
let's be like them.
- Yeah, and I think a lot of places use it
for like Hadoop and things like that.
And one of the nice things, as you mentioned about
like how Airflow has the same model,
where you can create these contributions,
which are different connectors for Luigi or for Airflow,
where you can connect them to either different
cloud providers or different data stores, things like that.
And that allows you to use Luigi or any workflow manager
in numerous different contexts,
whether it's locally on your own computer,
running things in Docker containers, or whether it's deploying out to AWS and scaling massively
horizontal.
These workflow managers really support that, and that's why they're a necessary component
in how we productionize our data pipelines.
Yeah.
Again, they just seem so empowering for allowing people to focus on just each step independently,
which is excellent.
Did you consider other ones?
Did you consider Airflow or Dagster or any of these other ones?
Or did you find this fit and you're like, "We're going with this"?
We did look at some other ones.
We were using Nextflow for a little bit, which is a bioinformatic-flavored workflow manager.
It's very focused on bioinformatics as its primary use case, although you could use it
for anything.
is similar to Groovy and it's based in Groovy.
And that was one of the detractors for us
is that it was a little hard to get under the hood
and use that because of it.
I did briefly look at Dagster after hearing a few episodes,
I think, it may have been a different podcast, but.
- Yeah, I did have Tobias Macion to give us a overview
of the whole data engineering landscape.
So possibly, I know he spoke about it then,
but I'm not sure when you heard about it.
- Yeah, yeah, so I heard about it on a podcast,
probably this one as well.
And I did look into it, but it didn't have it at that time.
It was pretty early and it didn't have any connectors
to AWS in the ways that we like to use Luigi.
- Connectors, right?
That's such an important thing
'cause otherwise you've got to learn the API
of every single thing you're talking to.
- Yeah, I mean, these days, knowing how Luigi works,
it actually wouldn't have been that big of a task
to look under the hood.
But yeah, so we did choose Luigi and particularly we like how it handles deployment to AWS.
And we use it on the service called AWS batch, which is, I guess it might be similar to like a Kubernetes pod,
although I haven't done anything with K8s or anything like that.
So I'm not speaking from experience, but it essentially scales up
EC2 instances, these elastic compute instances on the cloud
as you need them, and it gives out jobs to the virtual computers
as necessary.
So it spins them up, allocates jobs in a Docker container,
they run, when there's no more jobs on the instance, it shuts off.
- Okay, so you come up with like an AMI,
an Amazon machine image that's preconfigured,
set up ready to run, and then you say,
I'm gonna give you a bunch of data,
each one of these data gets passed the machine
and it runs and then maybe even shuts down when it's done?
- Yeah, there is an AMI, we keep the AMI pretty simple
because it's sort of the base for all of them.
And then the way batch works is you have
your top level AMI,
that's called the compute environment, I believe.
And then inside of it, you run the actual job
and the job runs inside of a Docker container.
So-- - Oh, I see.
So the Docker container is pre-configured
with like all the Python dependencies
and the settings that it needs and whatnot.
- Right, so we have each task in Luigi,
each little piece of work has its own Docker container.
And then we push those out into the cloud
and they get allocated out onto these machines.
They run their task, data comes in from S3,
goes back out to S3, nothing is left on the hard drives,
and then they disappear.
And they're these little ephemeral compute instances.
And that's all managed by a workflow manager
such as Luigi or Airflow or Nextflow.
- Wow, that's pretty awesome.
One of the things that I remember reading and thinking,
wow, that's a pretty crazy use of the cloud
was this Ars Technica article from,
look at that year, 2011.
- Oh, wow.
- So if you think back to 2011,
like the cloud was really new
and the idea of spending a ton of money on it
and getting a bunch of compute out of it
was still somewhat foreign to people.
So there's this article I'll link to called
the $1,279 per hour,
30,000 core cluster built on Amazon EC2 cloud,
which is this company, this pharmaceutical company
that needed to do a lot of computing.
And they said, instead of buying a supercomputer basically,
we're gonna come up and just fire off
an insane amount of cores.
And I think if I remember reading this correctly,
that they weren't allowed to make that many cores
in a single data center.
So they had to do this across--
also had to coordinate in multi-data center type
of processing as well, because it's
just the scale of everything.
This seems like the type of work that you all might be doing.
>>Yeah, it does look very familiar.
We do--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Can you tell us anything about this?
Yeah, we do occasionally have a certain type
of molecular modeling job that we can scale very wide.
And I think this sort of 30,000 number looks pretty familiar.
I think our largest jobs today have been about 10,000 CPUs
wide and running for a few days, so maybe
like four or five days. I think the number was like four or five
days on the 10,000 cores. Yeah, yeah, it's a it's, it's a lot.
And I saw I think it was like over a million CPU hours on AWS
batch. And that was just something that we could really
heavily parallelize and we needed the data fast and yeah,
- It worked.
You pull it all back and aggregate it all together
at the end and it was a really useful dataset.
And it's pretty amazing what you can do
on some of these cloud providers by going really wide.
- Yeah, it's crazy.
You know, I mean, there's some places
where it makes sense to like build true supercomputers
like Oak Ridge has this thing called Summit,
which is like this insane supercomputer that they have.
But a lot of times,
there's the latency of getting something like this set up.
There's the overhead of, guess what?
Now you're an admin for like an insane,
there's only three in the world supercomputer type system.
Right, it's gotta be empowering to be able to just go,
hit go, and then let all this happen
and not worry about all those details, right?
- Yeah, and there's definitely still some stress involved
in starting one of these jobs.
If you just, you know, it's not cheap.
Anyway, you slice it.
We do try to, you know, do everything we can
to make it as efficient in cost as possible, but.
- There's two aspects to it that really jump out to me.
One is the, oh, was that the wrong version of the code?
The one that still had the bug?
We got to throw away all the data?
Whoops, we just ran for five days and, you know,
thousands of dollars got burned up
and there's a bit of a problem there.
So whoops, and now it's five days later
till you get the answer as well, right?
That's one.
And then I'm losing track of my thought on my other one,
but yeah, anyway, it's just gotta be stressful
to be like to set that up and then press go, right?
- Yeah, it definitely is.
I think one of the benefits is a lot of our computational
team does have a experimental background and doing experiments in the lab, these sort of
numbers like tens of thousands of dollars for an experiment are not really that uncommon.
And for those kind of things, you get really careful and you check all the boxes and double
check everything.
And so I think a lot of us have had that experience.
And so even when we're dealing with software, we'll be very careful and we'll do the tests
and quality control before we really let her rip.
Yeah, I worked on some projects when I was in grad school that were on a silicon graphics,
big mainframe type thing.
And obviously much lower importance than solving diseases and stuff is just solving math problems.
But I remember coming in to work on the project one day and none of our workstations could
log in to the Silicon Graphics machine and what is wrong with this thing?
And it was so loud.
It was in the other room.
hear that roaring away in there, it clearly was loud.
And what happened was it wasn't me,
it was someone else in the group had written some code
and these things would run all night,
we'd come in in the morning and check them.
And what had happened was they had a bug in their code,
which they knew they were trying to diagnose it.
So they were printing out a bunch of log stuff
or something like that.
Well, they did that in a tight loop on a high end computer
for a night and it filled up the hard drive
till it had zero bytes left.
And apparently the Silicon graphics machine
couldn't operate anymore was literally zero bytes.
And so it just stopped working.
They couldn't get it to turn on.
It was like, it took days to get it back, I believe.
- Oh, oops.
- But it's like that kind of stuff, right?
I mean, this, you're not gonna break EC2,
but you don't know until the next day that,
oh, look, you filled up the computer
and it doesn't work anymore, right?
When you're doing that much computing,
you could run out of different resources,
you could run into all kinds of problems.
- Absolutely.
And we are without our war stories of doing this,
but I think we've definitely learned a lot of lessons
along the way of how to monitor your jobs effectively
and double check things.
But sometimes, yeah, you run a big job
and it doesn't quite turn out right,
but it's the cost of doing business, I guess.
- Yeah, I mean, it's very computational to explore stuff
like this kind of stuff,
but that's also what enables it, right?
Without this computing power, it would just not be a thing.
- Absolutely, like a lot of the data
just takes a lot of time to process
and there's just not really any way around it.
And even when you're iterating,
you have to go through all the hoops
to look at the data at the end.
- Yeah, so you talked about APIs,
you talked about Datastore,
What are you using for a database?
Is this like a hosted RDS AWS thing
or what is the story with that?
- Yeah, so we have a few different places to store data.
Our larger scale internal data,
we store in Django based web app
and we use the Django ORM for SQL based database,
a MySQL database on AWS.
and that has worked surprisingly effectively actually.
I've heard some people say that the Django ORM
is really slow and you scale out and things,
but if you design it correctly,
I think it'll surprise you.
- I think that's so true.
I hear so many things about,
oh, ORMs are slow or this thing is slow in this way.
And wow, if you have the queries structured well,
If you do the joins ahead of time,
if you have indexes and you've put the work
into finding all these things, it's mind blowing.
When I go to sites, I won't call any out,
I don't know if they've been updated or whatever,
but you go to a site and you're like,
this site is taking four or five seconds to load.
What could it possibly be doing?
I mean, I know it has some data,
but it doesn't have unimaginable amounts of data, right?
Surely somebody could just put an index in here
or worst case a cache in something
and it would just transform it, right?
So yeah, I'm glad to hear you're having good experiences.
- Yeah, it's been, we definitely fairly regularly
run into slow queries.
They're usually not too bad to solve.
I'm sure at some point we'll get to something really wonky
that will be challenging, but I think for the most part,
yeah, we've been able to solve it through better query design
and better indexing.
- Yeah, do you ever do things where you opt out
of the sort of class-based query syntax
and go straight to SQL queries, you know,
here and there to make sure that that part works better?
- We have tried it for some particular
sequence-based searches that we do.
And I actually found that most of the time,
like you can write it in the ORM,
it's just a little more complicated.
But I do expect that at some point
we will be writing raw SQL queries
because out of necessity.
- Yeah, but it's not the majority.
Mainly you're using the ORM and then it's okay.
- Yeah, and I think a lot of benefits
from the appropriate data model
will help the queries along the way.
- Yeah, absolutely.
The thing I found the slowest about ORMs and ODM
if you're doing document databases
is the deserialization actually, right?
It's not the query time, but it's like,
I gotta generate a hundred thousand Python objects
and that just happens to be not that fast.
- You're talking about my Monday morning, Michael.
(laughing)
- And in those cases, I think that that's the place
where it makes sense to maybe do some kind of
like a projection or something.
I don't know how to do it in Django or M,
but in say Mongo engine, you can say,
I know what I'm going to get back is an iterable set
of these objects that match to the data,
but only actually add-- just fill out these two fields.
Most of the data, just throw it away.
Don't try to parse it and convert it.
Just like, I just want these two fields.
And that usually makes it dramatically faster.
>>Yeah, we've run into a number of bottlenecks
at the serialization layer.
And we have been experimenting with a variety
of different ways to solve those issues.
And yeah, sometimes it means putting fewer Python objects
between you and the data and that often speeds it up,
even if it makes it a little bit harder to interpret
in your development environment.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Or just say, you know what?
I just need dictionaries this time.
Like I know it's gonna be less fun,
but that's what it takes.
- That was the fix on Monday morning.
We do try to extensively use data classes
for a lot of our interoperability.
When data comes in and out of a pipeline,
we like to have it in a data class
and a centrally stored repository.
And then our Django web app also has access to that.
So it knows what the structure of the data coming in is,
and it knows what to serialize it to when it's coming out.
And those, the Python data classes
has been a really useful tool for that.
but it's, I think we were talking about that
on another podcast a few weeks ago,
maybe it was the Python Bytes one,
that the data classes can be slow
and sometimes it's better to just have a dictionary,
even if it is a very highly structured dictionary.
- Yeah, I think the problem is maintainability
and whatnot, but if it's five times slower,
you know what, this time it matters.
So we're gonna just bite the bullet
and have to deal with it.
So we had time for just a little bit more digging into it.
So you talked about the Django RM, Django REST framework,
which is all great.
What's the server deployment story?
Like, how do you run that thing?
Is it with a G unicorn?
Is it micro-Whiskey?
You know, what's your setup on that side of things?
- Ours is a little custom.
I guess in some ways it's pretty standard.
I think we're blanking on exactly how it's set up now,
but there's an Nginx proxy.
I am blanking on, it might be g-unicorn.
Yeah, but the--
- I feel like g-unicorn and Django go together frequently.
I'm not sure why they got paired up specifically,
but yeah, it's a good one.
And we end up deploying it out to AWS Elastic Beanstalk,
which is a source of some conversation in our team
because there's some things we really like about it
and there's some things that are really annoying
in terms of the deployment is much more complicated
than we would like it to be.
But we have everything wrapped up
in a pretty gnarly CDK stack
that does a lot of this work.
It was messy, but you've solved it with a CDK.
Now it's just you push the button and it's okay.
- It's exactly like that.
We have a very automated deployment process.
I wouldn't like to refactor it,
but it's there and it works.
So that works for us, but I think, yeah,
it's a pretty standard Django deployment on the cloud
and it works well.
- Yeah, cool.
- All right, well, I think that's probably about it
for time to talk about the specifics
of what you all are doing,
but there's the last two questions as always.
So let's start with the editor.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use?
- VS Code.
A lot of the remote development environment on that.
- Oh yeah, you use the remote aspect of it?
- Yeah, we're doing a lot of work on EC2 instances
as our day-to-day work.
And VS Code, the way it works with instances in the cloud
is really amazing.
So I would encourage anyone to check out that extension.
- Yeah, you get access to like the file system
on the remote machine and basically
it's just your view into that server,
but it's more or less standard VS Code, right?
But when you hit run, it just runs up there.
- It feels exactly like you're on your own computer.
Sometimes I actually get confused
whether I'm on a remote or not.
- It doesn't work 'cause I'm in Virginia, I see.
- Yeah. - All right.
And then notable PyPI package?
- I'll have to shout out some of the ones
we talked about.
I would encourage people to look at AWS CDK
if they're on AWS.
I think it has some really interesting things there.
And then also Luigi as a workflow manager,
if people are doing any of these types of data pipelines
that have tasks that get reused,
these sort of work will manage, they're really cool.
and Luigi is a pretty accessible one
for anyone that's familiar with Python.
- Yeah, all right, fantastic, yeah.
I'm just learning to embrace these workflow managers,
but they do seem really amazing.
All right, so for all the biologists
and scientists out there listening,
thinking you've got this really cool setup
and all this cool computational infrastructure,
you know, what do you tell them?
How do they get started?
Maybe biology or wherever.
- Yeah, I think biology is a good place to start,
but we're also happy to have people
come from a software background
that are really interested in learning the biology.
And I guess as a final plug,
we do have a few open positions,
so if you're interested, check out our careers page
and give us an application.
- Are you guys a remote place?
Remote friendly, or what's the story these days?
- Yep, we're remote friendly.
I'm actually living in Philadelphia
and our company is based in Cambridge.
So yeah.
- Oh, interesting.
I mean, it's a short trip to the cloud,
no matter where you come from, basically.
- Absolutely.
- Right on.
Oh, David, thank you for being here
and giving us this look inside all the gene editing
Python stuff you're doing.
- Thank you, Michael.
It was a pleasure.
- Yeah, you bet.
Bye.
- Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]